Trail: Deeper Understanding

# What's a Git commit?

Notes:

represents a moment in time in your code

What changed?

What did it change from and what did it change to?

When did it change and who changed it?

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?

## a **`commit`** object + a **`tree`** object

Notes:

And recall that Git stores all information as objects.

When you create a Git commit, there are two objects written into Git's storage:

...

the commit contains meta information like "who made the change and when did they make it".

the tree represents a snapshot of the entire codebase at this moment.

...

Each commit in your Git history (or log) contains both of those objects.

Even if you change only a single line in a single file and commit it, Git doesn't just store that one line change —

it stores information about the change, and an entire snapshot of the codebase.

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?

## Each commit is represented by a **unique identifier** (SHA)

### The SHA is a hash generated from the tree

<!-- .element: class="fragment" -->

### It's deterministically unique

<!-- .element: class="fragment" -->

Notes:

When a commit is written to your Git log, Git generates an identifier for it

you'll often hear the identifier referred to as the "SHA"

because it's generated by the SHA-1 checksum algorithm

...

Which is an algorithm to generate a hash based on the exact tree of changes

and which happens to be deterministically unique

so any specific set of code generates a different value than another set that differs by even one single character.

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?,SHAs

TODO: show the log here with SHA's

Notes:

If you run the command `git log` in a directory managed by Git,

you can see the SHA of each commit —

it's the cryptic sequence of characters representing each commit.

You might have checked out a specific commit by its SHA before with a command like `git checkout SHA`

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?

## Notes on `git log`

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?,git log

IMAGE: this is the output by default

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?,git log

IMAGE: through some flags, you can make it look like this

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?,git log

TODO: - for the rest of this talk I'm going to show the git log in this format

Notes:

- and I'll call it `git loggy` to make it obvious this isn't the default behavior
- note that you too can make your terminal recognize this command by using aliases

---

Trail: Deeper Understanding,What's A Commit?

## Your working directory always points at a specific commit/hash

IMAGE: some illustration?

---
